feat(comp/otelcol): component to filter OTEL telemetry (#5562)
grafana/agent: docs/sources/flow/reference/components/otelcol.processor.filter.md

there is also a set of metrics-only functions exclusively by the processor
* [HasAttrKeyOnDataPoint][]
* [HasAttrOnDataPoint][]

[OTTL][] statements used in `filterprocessor` mostly contain constructs such as:
* [Booleans][OTTL booleans]:
  * `not true`
  * `not IsMatch(name, "http_.*")`
* [Math expressions][OTTL math expressions]:
  * `1 + 1`
  * `end_time_unix_nano - start_time_unix_nano`
  * `sum([1, 2, 3, 4]) + (10 / 1) - 1`

{{% admonition type="note" %}}
Some characters inside River strings [need to be escaped][river-strings] with a `\` character.
For example, the OTTL statement `attributes["grpc"] == true` 
is written in River as `attributes[\"grpc\"] == true`.

[river-strings]: {{< relref "../../config-language/expressions/types_and_values.md/#strings" >}}
{{% /admonition %}}

{{% admonition type="note" %}}
`otelcol.processor.filter` is a wrapper over the upstream
OpenTelemetry Collector `filter` processor. If necessary, bug reports or feature requests
will be redirected to the upstream repository.
{{% /admonition %}}

You can specify multiple `otelcol.processor.filter` components by giving them different labels.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

{{% admonition type="warning" %}}
Exercise caution when using `otelcol.processor.filter`:

- Make sure you understand the look of the incoming data and test the configuration thoroughly. 
  In general, use as specific a configuration as possible to lower the risk of the wrong data being dropped.
- [Orphaned Telemetry][]: The processor allows dropping spans. Dropping a span may lead to 
  orphaned spans if the dropped span is a parent. Dropping a span may lead to orphaned logs 
  if the log references the dropped span.

[Orphaned Telemetry]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/v0.85.0/docs/standard-warnings.md#orphaned-telemetry
{{% /admonition %}}

```

[OTTL math expressions]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/v0.85.0/pkg/ottl#math-expressions
[OTTL boolean expressions]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/v0.85.0/pkg/ottl#boolean-expressions
[OTTL resource context]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/v0.85.0/pkg/ottl/contexts/ottlresource/README.md
[OTTL scope context]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/v0.85.0/pkg/ottl/contexts/ottlscope/README.md
[OTTL span context]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/v0.85.0/pkg/ottl/contexts/ottlspan/README.md
[OTTL spanevent context]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/v0.85.0/pkg/ottl/contexts/ottlspanevent/README.md
[OTTL metric context]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/v0.85.0/pkg/ottl/contexts/ottlmetric/README.md
[OTTL datapoint context]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/v0.85.0/pkg/ottl/contexts/ottldatapoint/README.md

> [OTTL log context]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/v0.85.0/pkg/ottl/contexts/ottllog/README.md

Reviewer: Are all of those URLs used in this doc page?

Author: Thanks for the review! I've removed the unused Markdown refs in latest commit.

---
aliases:
- /docs/grafana-cloud/agent/flow/reference/components/otelcol.processor.filter/
- /docs/grafana-cloud/monitor-infrastructure/agent/flow/reference/components/otelcol.processor.filter/
- /docs/grafana-cloud/monitor-infrastructure/integrations/agent/flow/reference/components/otelcol.processor.filter/
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/agent/latest/flow/reference/components/otelcol.processor.filter/
labels:
  stage: experimental
title: otelcol.processor.filter
description: Learn about otelcol.processor.filter
---

# otelcol.processor.filter

> {{< docs/shared lookup="flow/stability/experimental.md" source="agent" version="<AGENT VERSION>" >}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{< docs/shared lookup="flow/stability/experimental.md" source="agent" version="<AGENT_VERSION>" >}}
```

We are migrating to use an underscore in the `<AGENT_VERSION>` variable

`otelcol.processor.filter` accepts and filters telemetry data from other `otelcol`
components using the [OpenTelemetry Transformation Language (OTTL)][OTTL].
OTTL statements consist of [OTTL Converter functions][], which act on paths.
A path is a reference to a telemetry data such as:
* Resource attributes.
* Instrumentation scope name.
* Span attributes.

> If any condition is met, the telemetry data is dropped (each condition is ORed together)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If any condition is met, the telemetry data is dropped (each condition is ORed together).
```

> In addition to the [standard OTTL Converter functions][OTTL Converter functions], 
> there is also a set of metrics-only functions exclusively by the processor

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to the [standard OTTL Converter functions][OTTL Converter functions], 
the following metrics-only functions are used exclusively by the processor:
```

I'm not sure this rephrase is accurate. The original looks like it's missing some words... and this is my best guess at what was intended.

* [HasAttrKeyOnDataPoint][]
* [HasAttrOnDataPoint][]

[OTTL][] statements used in `otelcol.processor.filter` mostly contain constructs such as:
* [Booleans][OTTL booleans]:
  * `not true`
  * `not IsMatch(name, "http_.*")`
* [Math expressions][OTTL math expressions]:
  * `1 + 1`
  * `end_time_unix_nano - start_time_unix_nano`
  * `sum([1, 2, 3, 4]) + (10 / 1) - 1`

{{% admonition type="note" %}}
Some characters inside River strings [need to be escaped][river-strings] with a `\` character.
For example, the OTTL statement `attributes["grpc"] == true` 
is written in River as `attributes[\"grpc\"] == true`.

[river-strings]: {{< relref "../../config-language/expressions/types_and_values.md/#strings" >}}

> {{% /admonition %}}

Reviewer: The next release of the agent will support raw strings, so I updated some of the documentation in #5636. I'm happy to update the `otelcol.processor.filter` docs after your PR is merged though. There's no need to mention raw strings in your PR.

{{% admonition type="note" %}}
`otelcol.processor.filter` is a wrapper over the upstream
OpenTelemetry Collector `filter` processor. If necessary, bug reports or feature requests
will be redirected to the upstream repository.
{{% /admonition %}}

You can specify multiple `otelcol.processor.filter` components by giving them different labels.

{{% admonition type="warning" %}}
Exercise caution when using `otelcol.processor.filter`:

> - Make sure you understand the look of the incoming data and test the configuration thoroughly. 

Reviewer 2: What is meant by "understand the look"?  The meaning isn't clear and I'm not sure what to suggest here.

Author: It should be something akin to understanding the data's schema/format. Let me wordsmith this one

>   In general, use as specific a configuration as possible to lower the risk of the wrong data being dropped.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  In general, use a configuration that is as specific as possible ensure you retain only the data you want to keep.
```

I've tried to rephrase this in a more active and positive way. Does this stay true to the intent of the concept described?

Author: Very much so. Suggested change accepted. Thanks!

`error_mode` | `string` | How to react to errors if they occur while processing a statement. | `"propagate"` | no

The supported values for `error_mode` are:
* `ignore`: Ignore errors returned by statements and continue on to the next statement. This is the recommended mode.
* `propagate`: Return the error up the pipeline. This will result in the payload being dropped from the Agent.

## Blocks

The following blocks are supported inside the definition of
`otelcol.processor.filter`:

Hierarchy | Block       | Description                                       | Required
--------- | ----------- | ------------------------------------------------- | --------
traces    | [traces][]  | Statements which filter traces.                   | no
metrics   | [metrics][] | Statements which filter metrics.                  | no
logs      | [logs][]    | Statements which filter logs.                     | no
output    | [output][]  | Configures where to send received telemetry data. | yes

[traces]: #traces-block
[metrics]: #metrics-block
[logs]: #logs-block
[output]: #output-block

### traces block

> The `traces` block specifies statements which filter trace telemetry signals. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `traces` block specifies statements that filter trace telemetry signals. 
```

Only one `traces` block can be specified.

Name        | Type           | Description                                         | Default | Required
----------- | -------------- | --------------------------------------------------- | ------- | --------
`span`      | `list(string)` | List of OTTL statements filtering OTLP spans.       |         | no
`spanevent` | `list(string)` | List of OTTL statements filtering OTLP span events. |         | no

The syntax of OTTL statements depends on the OTTL context. See the OpenTelemetry 
documentation for more information:
* [OTTL span context][]
* [OTTL spanevent context][]

Statements are checked in order from "high level" to "low level" telemetry, in this order:
1. `span`
2. `spanevent`

> Hence, if at least one `span` condition is satisfied, the `spanevent` conditions will not be checked.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If at least one `span` condition is satisfied, the `spanevent` conditions will not be checked.
```

Only one of the statements inside the list of statements has to be satisfied.

If all span events for a span are dropped, the span will be left intact.

### metrics block

> The `metrics` block specifies statements which filter metric telemetry signals. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `metrics` block specifies statements that filter metric telemetry signals. 
```

Only one `metrics` blocks can be specified.

Name        | Type           | Description                                               | Default | Required
----------- | -------------- | --------------------------------------------------------- | ------- | --------
`metric`    | `list(string)` | List of OTTL statements filtering OTLP metric.            |         | no
`datapoint` | `list(string)` | List of OTTL statements filtering OTLP metric datapoints. |         | no

The syntax of OTTL statements depends on the OTTL context. See the OpenTelemetry 
documentation for more information:
* [OTTL metric context][]
* [OTTL datapoint context][]

Statements are checked in order from "high level" to "low level" telemetry, in this order:
1. `metric`
2. `datapoint`

> Hence, if at least one `metric` condition is satisfied, the `datapoint` conditions will not be checked.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If at least one `metric` condition is satisfied, the `datapoint` conditions will not be checked.
```

Only one of the statements inside the list of statements has to be satisfied.

If all datapoints for a metric are dropped, the metric will also be dropped.

### logs block

> The `logs` block specifies statements which filter log telemetry signals. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `logs` block specifies statements that filter log telemetry signals. 
```
